As data product managers,
our work is never done.
Once a product is released,
we analyze data to understand how a product is
performing and to look for opportunities to improve the product and features offered.
These findings lead to product updates,
which leads to a new wave of analysis and feature design.
To iterate is to perform an action repeatedly by repeatedly evaluating,
designing, and implementing changes to our product.
Good product managers embrace the process of iterative design.
By leveraging data during the iterative design process,
we can quickly identify the most important areas to focus our attention on during
these cycles of iterative design to ensure
our product has a largest possible appeal to customers.
The classic cycle of iterative design is quite simple.
To kick off a cycle,
you must design something.
In the case of a data product manager,
this may be a product or a feature for a product that
leverages large amounts of user data to improve the user experience.
For example, a data product manager for music playing app might work
on creating a feature that recommend similar music to other songs a user has played.
After the feature is designed,
it can be put in place or implemented.
For a data product manager,
this can mean creating a prototype to put in front of users for feedback or
launching an AB or multivariate test that exposes the new design to a portion of users.
Once the new design has been put in front of others,
it is time to evaluate the performance of the design.
As a data product manager,
this may mean analyzing conversion funnels and
usage data to look for areas a design can be improved.
As data analysis suggest ways that our design can be made stronger,
we return to the design stage and begin implementing changes based on
our findings and the cycle of iterative design continues.
As data product managers,
it can be helpful to dig deeper into the design implement
evaluate stages by leveraging the steps of design thinking.
For a data product manager,
the design thinking cycle expands on the cycle
of iterative design by laying out three stages and
six steps that highlight
data-driven best practices for changing or creating features and products.
Design thinking has a long history,
but the cycle of design thinking became formalized in
the 2000s as a Stanford Business School of Design,
or D.School, made teaching design thinking a central focus of their programs.
The first stage in the cycle of design thinking is understanding users.
This includes empathizing with users by researching their wants and needs.
This involves analyzing quantitative data
as well as talking with customers to gather qualitative data.
After the empathize step,
the next step is define or combining all research to define a user's problems.
After the understand stage comes the explorer stage,
which is where different ideas for meeting a user's needs are explored.
The first step in explore is ideation,
which is when product managers and designers can think broadly and generate
a large list of potential ideas they might build to meet the user needs.
Once many ideas have been generated,
a few that seem like a best fit could be prototyped.
Data product managers often prototype
very large changes to seek feedback before committing development resources.
Then the design thinking cycle enters the materialize phase.
The first step in the materialize phase is to test the change.
The testing phase may include getting feedback on the prototype from actual users.
The testing step can also include running
experiments by exposing some live users to the new feature.
Finally, after testing the designer feature is implemented for all users,
if it was successful.
With the feature launched,
a product manager will continue to analyze usage data and
reach out to customers to find users and areas that can be improved.
With this, the cycle begins again.
By following this cycle,
product managers leverage data to drive
the creation of the most appealing product for users.